src/contents/fixing-react-set-interval.mdx, before:

---
author: Ibrahim ben Salah
datetime: 2022-11-26T15:22:00Z
title: Fixing React (setInterval)
featured: false
draft: false
tags:
  - react
  - comparison
  - xania
  - setInterval
ogImage: ""
description: A comparison of Dan Abramov's useInterval and an alternative solution in Xania.
---

import Counter from "./test/Counter";

Ever struggle with setInterval in React?

React is notoriously known for "intriguing problem"'s when trying to implement setInterval. The why and possibly the best solution
to that is using Dan's declarative `useInterval` hook described in his [blog](https://overreacted.io/making-setinterval-declarative-with-react-hooks/)

| In action

<Counter client:load />

First we show complete solution using the `useInterval` in React followed by a solution using `rxjs` observables in Xania.

## Table of contents

## React

```typescript
/** React */

function Counter() {
  const [count, setCount] = useState(0);
  const [delay, setDelay] = useState(1000);

  useInterval(() => {
    // Your custom logic here
    setCount(count + 1);
  }, delay);

  return (
    <h1>
      <div>{count}</div>
      <input value={delay} onChange={e => setDelay(e.target.value)} />
    </h1>
  );
}

function useInterval(callback, delay) {
  const savedCallback = useRef();

  // Remember the latest function.
  useEffect(() => {
    savedCallback.current = callback;
  }, [callback]);

  // Set up the interval.
  useEffect(() => {
    function tick() {
      savedCallback.current();
    }
    if (delay !== null) {
      let id = setInterval(tick, delay);
      return () => clearInterval(id);
    }
  }, [delay]);
}
```

If you just care about a working solution in React you can stop reading.

But me, I care about my long experience with rxjs and want to leverage that to develop my UI, and you should care too.

Let see how we can fix this with rxjs.

## Alternative solution with rxjs

```typescript
/** @xania/view */

function Counter() {
  const delay = new Rx.BehaviorSubject<number>(1000);
  const count = delay.pipe(
    Ro.switchMap(d => Rx.timer(0, d)),
    Ro.scan(acc => acc + 1, 0)
  );
  return (
    <h1>
      <div>{count}</div>
      <input value={delay} change={e => delay.next(e.node.value)} />
    </h1>
  );
}
```

Yes, this is all! is this easy? no, not if you stuggle with rxjs.

The point here is that if you do know rxjs then you can just throw that at Xania and it all works.
If there are other reactive libraries that you rather use then
Xania supports it too in case it support the following observable pattern

## Minimal api of Observable pattern

```javascript
/** Observable pattern support in @xania/view */

interface Observable<T> {
  subscribe(observer: NextObserver<T>): Unsubscribable;
}

interface NextObserver<T> {
  next(value: T): void;
}
```

Commit message:

more blogs work in progress

src/contents/fixing-react-set-interval.mdx, after:

---
author: Ibrahim ben Salah
datetime: 2022-11-26T15:22:00Z
title: Fixing React (setInterval)
featured: false
draft: false
tags:
  - react
  - comparison
  - xania
  - setInterval
ogImage: ""
description: A comparison of Dan Abramov's useInterval and an alternative solution in Xania.
---

import Counter from "./test/Counter";

Ever struggle with setInterval in React?

React is notoriously known for "intriguing problem"'s when trying to implement setInterval. The why and possibly the best solution
to that is using Dan's declarative `useInterval` hook described in his [blog](https://overreacted.io/making-setinterval-declarative-with-react-hooks/)

| In action

<Counter client:load />

First we show complete solution using the `useInterval` in React followed by a solution using `rxjs` observables in Xania.

## Table of contents

## React

```typescript
/** React */

function Counter() {
  const [count, setCount] = useState(0);
  const [delay, setDelay] = useState(1000);

  useInterval(() => {
    // Your custom logic here
    setCount(count + 1);
  }, delay);

  return (
    <h1>
      <div>{count}</div>
      <input value={delay} onChange={e => setDelay(e.target.value)} />
    </h1>
  );
}

function useInterval(callback, delay) {
  const savedCallback = useRef();

  // Remember the latest function.
  useEffect(() => {
    savedCallback.current = callback;
  }, [callback]);

  // Set up the interval.
  useEffect(() => {
    function tick() {
      savedCallback.current();
    }
    if (delay !== null) {
      let id = setInterval(tick, delay);
      return () => clearInterval(id);
    }
  }, [delay]);
}
```

If you just care about a working solution in React you can stop reading.

This implementation is full of gotcha's. The use of `useRef`, `useEffect` and again `useEffect` is kind of required to make this work.
Hopefully you never have to write it yourself and yet there are cases where you would have to. Try to think of how you could use this pattern
to connect / subscribe to external web socket. The same implementation would be needed to make sure you don't connect more than once.

We, the Xania Team, also care about our long experience with rxjs where those challenges are kind of trivial and want to leverage that to develop our UI.

Let see how we can fix this with rxjs.

## Alternative solution with rxjs

```typescript
/** @xania/view */

function Counter() {
  const delay = new Rx.BehaviorSubject<number>(1000);
  const count = delay.pipe(
    Ro.switchMap(d => Rx.timer(0, d)),
    Ro.scan(acc => acc + 1, 0)
  );
  return (
    <h1>
      <div>{count}</div>
      <input value={delay} change={e => delay.next(e.node.value)} />
    </h1>
  );
}
```

Yes, this is all! is this easy? no, not if you stuggle with rxjs.

The point here is that this solution is totaly agnostic to whatever library your end up using.
Maybe it's a good idea to implement a `useObservable` using the same way `useInterval` is
implemented to support rxjs in React

But in Xania there is no effort needed as Xania has first class support for rxjs,
In fact all the code in Xania's code snippet is agnostic to Xania itself.
